OSSM-8210: Directing outbound traffic (#84144)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/ossm-directing-egress-traffic-through-a-gateway-using-istio-apis.adoc

// This procedure is used in the following assembly:
// * gateways/ossm-directing-outbound-traffic-through-a-gateway

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="ossm-directing-egress-traffic-through-a-gateway-using-istio-apis_{context}"]
= Directing egress traffic through a gateway using Istio APIs

> :context: ossm-directing-egress-traffic-through-a-gateway-using-istio-apis

Reviewer: Same comment about the context that I don't think should be set here

Author: done

> Follow this procedure to use {istio} APIs to direct outbound HTTP traffic through a gateway that was installed using gateway injection.

Reviewer: Not critical for this PR's merge, but in the future should avoid self-referential language like "follow this procedure"

Author: done

.Prerequisites

* You have installed a gateway using gateway injection.

.Procedure

. Run the following command to create a namespace called `curl`:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create namespace curl
----

> . Depending on the update strategy you're using, enable sidecar injection in the namespace by running the appropriate command(s): 

Reviewer: Shouldn't use contractions per SSG, or (s) per ISG.

```suggestion
. Depending on the update strategy you are using, enable sidecar injection in the namespace by running the appropriate commands: 
```

Author: done

.. If you are using the `InPlace` update strategy, run the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc label namespace curl istio-injection=enabled
----

.. If you are using the `RevisionBased` update strategy, run the following commands:

> ... Find your `<revision-name>` by running the following command:

Author: Revised this line item

+
[source, terminal]
----
$ oc get istiorevisions.sailoperator.io
----
+

> .Example output:

Reviewer: No ending colon for titles

```suggestion
.Example output
```

Author: done

[source,terminal]
----
NAME              TYPE    READY   STATUS    IN USE   VERSION   AGE

> default-v1-23-0   Local   True    Healthy   True    v1.23.0   3m33s

Reviewer: Alignment is slightly off with the VERSION header

```suggestion
default-v1-23-0   Local   True    Healthy   True     v1.23.0   3m33s
```

Author: done

----

> ... Run the following command to label the namespace with the revision name to enable sidecar injection:

Reviewer: Recommend making this and the above step parallel in where you put the "run the following command". Here it's at the beginning, but the previous step has it at the end.

Author: done

+

> [source, terminal]

Reviewer: No space

```suggestion
[source,terminal]
```

Author: done

----
$ oc label namespace curl istio.io/rev=default-v1-23-0
----

> . Deploy the `curl` client by applying the curl.yaml file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Deploy the `curl` client by applying the `curl.yaml` file:
```

Author: done

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -n curl -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/openshift-service-mesh/istio/refs/heads/master/samples/curl/curl.yaml
----

. Export a `CURL_POD` environment variable that has been initialized with the name of the curl pod:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ export CURL_POD=$(oc get pod -n curl -l app=curl -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')
----

. Create a YAML file named `http-se.yaml` that directs traffic from the mesh to an external service. The following example defines a `ServiceEntry` for a URL.
+
.Example configuration
[source,yaml,subs="attributes,verbatim"]
----
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1
kind: ServiceEntry
metadata:
  name: egress-se
  namespace: curl
spec:
  hosts:
    - docs.redhat.com
  ports:
    - number: 80
      name: http-port
      protocol: HTTP
  location: MESH_EXTERNAL
  resolution: DNS
----

. Apply the YAML file by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> oc apply -f http-se.yaml

Reviewer: Missing prompt

```suggestion
$ oc apply -f http-se.yaml
```

Author: done

----

. Ensure the `ServiceEntry` configuration was applied correctly. Send an HTTP request to the host that you specified in the previous step by running the following command: 
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc exec "$CURL_POD" -n curl -c curl -- curl -sSL -o /dev/null -D - http://docs.redhat.com
----
+
This command should return HTTP status codes, such as `301` (redirect) or `200` (success), indicating that the connection works.

> . Create a YAML file named `http-gtw.yaml` that creates an egress `Gateway` and routes traffic from the mesh to the host specified for the external service.

Reviewer: I don't see that this file is ever applied to the cluster, should it be?

            host: <gateway_name>.<gateway_namespace>.svc.cluster.local
            subset: rh-docs
            port:
              number: 80
          weight: 100
    - match:
        - gateways:
            - <gateway_namespace>/egress-gw # Egress gateway name defined in the file that you used in the previous step.
          port: 80
      route:
        - destination:
            host: docs.redhat.com
            port:
              number: 80
          weight: 100
----

. Apply the YAML file by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f http-vs.yaml
----

. Resend the HTTP request to the URL:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc exec "$CURL_POD" -n curl -c curl -- curl -sSL -o /dev/null -D - http://docs.redhat.com
----
+
The terminal should display information similar to the following output:
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
...
HTTP/1.1 301 Moved Permanently
...
location: <example_url>
...

HTTP/2 200
Content-Type: text/html; charset=utf-8
----

. Ensure that the request was routed through the gateway by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc logs deployment/<gateway_name> -n <gateway_namespace> | tail -1
----
+
[NOTE]
====

> Access logging must be enabled for this verification step to work. You can enable Access logging to the standard output by setting the `spec.values.meshConfig.accessLogFile` field to `/dev/stdout` in the {istio} resource.

Reviewer: Does "Access" really have to be capitalized?

Author: done

// This procedure is used in the following assembly:
// * gateways/ossm-directing-outbound-traffic-through-a-gateway

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="ossm-directing-egress-traffic-through-a-gateway-using-istio-apis_{context}"]
= Directing egress traffic through a gateway using Istio APIs
:context: ossm-directing-egress-traffic-through-a-gateway-using-istio-apis

> This procedure explains how to use {istio} APIs to direct outbound HTTP traffic through a gateway that was installed by using gateway injection.

Author: done

.Prerequisites

* You have installed a gateway using gateway injection.

.Procedure

. Run the following command to create a namespace called `curl`:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create namespace curl
----

> . Enable sidecar injection in the namespace. If you are using the `InPlace` upgrade strategy, run the following command:

Author: Done

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc label namespace curl istio-injection=enabled
----
+
[NOTE]
====
If you are using the `RevisionBased` upgrade strategy, run the following commands:

. To find your `<revision-name>`, run the following command:
+
[source, terminal]
----
$ oc get istiorevisions.sailoperator.io
----
+

> .Sample output:

Author: done

[source,terminal]
----
NAME              TYPE    READY   STATUS    IN USE   VERSION   AGE
default-v1-23-0   Local   True    Healthy   True    v1.23.0   3m33s
----

> . Label the namespace with the revision name to enable sidecar injection:

Author: done

+
[source, terminal]
----
$ oc label namespace curl istio.io/rev=default-v1-23-0
----
====

. Deploy the `curl` client by applying the curl.yaml file:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -n curl -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/openshift-service-mesh/istio/refs/heads/master/samples/curl/curl.yaml
----

. Export a `CURL_POD` environment variable that has been initialized with the name of the curl pod:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ export CURL_POD=$(oc get pod -n curl -l app=curl -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')
----

. Create a YAML file named `http-se.yaml` that directs traffic from the mesh to an external service. The following example defines a `ServiceEntry` for a URL.
+

> .Sample configuration

Author: done

[source,yaml,subs="attributes,verbatim"]
----
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1
kind: ServiceEntry
metadata:
  name: egress-se
  namespace: curl
spec:
  hosts:
    - docs.redhat.com
  ports:
    - number: 80
      name: http-port
      protocol: HTTP
  location: MESH_EXTERNAL
  resolution: DNS
----

. Apply the YAML file by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
oc apply -f http-se.yaml
----

> . Send an HTTP request to the host that you specified in the previous step to verify that the `ServiceEntry` was applied correctly.

Author: The steps after this one are not verification steps. If I add the .Verification, the various formatted methods I tried render all subsequent steps as part of the verification, which is not accurate. I think in this case I'll leave the workflow as it is.

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc exec "$CURL_POD" -n curl -c curl -- curl -sSL -o /dev/null -D - http://docs.redhat.com
----
+
This command should return HTTP status codes, such as `301` (redirect) or `200` (success), indicating that the connection works.

> . Create a YAML file named `http-gtw.yaml` that creates an egress `Gateway` and routes traffic from the mesh to to the host specified for the external service.

Author: done

+

> .Sample configuration

Author: done

[source,yaml,subs="attributes,verbatim"]
----
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: egress-gw
  namespace: <gateway_namespace> # Namespace where the egress gateway is deployed
spec:
  selector:
    istio: <gateway_name> # Selects the egress-gateway instance to handle this traffic
  servers:
    - port:
        number: 80
        name: http
        protocol: HTTP
      hosts:
        - docs.redhat.com # External service host, not a full URL.
---
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: DestinationRule
metadata:
  name: egress-dr
  namespace: <gateway_namespace> # Namespace where the egress gateway is deployed
spec:
  host: <gateway_name>.<gateway_namespace>.svc.cluster.local
  subsets:
    - name: rh-docs
----

> . Create a YAML file named `http-vs.yaml` that sets up a `VirtualService` to manage the flow of traffic from the application sidecars, through the egress gateway, and to the external host.

Author: done

+

> .Sample configuration

Author: done

kind: VirtualService
metadata:
  name: egress-vs
  namespace: curl # Namespace where the curl pod is running
spec:
  hosts:
    - docs.redhat.com # External service host, not a full URL.
  gateways:
    - mesh
    - <gateway_namespace>/egress-gw # Egress gateway name defined in the file that you used in the previous step.
  http:
    - match:
        - gateways:
            - mesh
          port: 80
      route:
        - destination:
            host: <gateway_name>.<gateway_namespace>.svc.cluster.local
            subset: rh-docs
            port:
              number: 80
          weight: 100
    - match:
        - gateways:
            - <gateway_namespace>/egress-gw # Egress gateway name defined in the file that you used in the previous step.
          port: 80
      route:
        - destination:
            host: docs.redhat.com
            port:
              number: 80
          weight: 100
----

. Apply the YAML file by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f http-vs.yaml
----

. Resend the HTTP request to the URL:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc exec "$CURL_POD" -n curl -c curl -- curl -sSL -o /dev/null -D - http://docs.redhat.com
----
+

> The terminal should display information similar to the following:

Author: done

.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
...
HTTP/1.1 301 Moved Permanently
...
location: <example_url>
...

HTTP/2 200
Content-Type: text/html; charset=utf-8
----

> . Verify that the request was routed through the gateway by entering the following command at the terminal:

Author: done

+
[NOTE]
====

>  Access logging must be enabled for this verification step to work. you can enable Access logging to the standard output by setting the `spec.values.meshConfig.accessLogFile` field to `/dev/stdout` in the {istio} resource.

Author: done
